Modify rule S6183: Expand and adjust for LaYC (#3155)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6183/cfamily/rule.adoc

Functions from the ``++std::cmp_*++`` family should be used to compare signed and unsigned values.

== Why is this an issue?

> Comparisons between ``++signed++`` and ``++unsigned++`` integers are dangerous because they produce counterintuitive results outside of their common value range.

Reviewer: When I read "common value range" I think of the commonly-used range of values for signed or unsigned int (independently).
Here, I think the intended meaning is the "intersection of value ranges"
```suggestion
Comparisons between ``++signed++`` and ``++unsigned++`` integers are dangerous because they produce counterintuitive results outside of their shared value range.
```

Author: Thanks for pointing this out. "Shared" is the intended meaning.

When a signed integer is compared to an unsigned one, the former might be converted to unsigned.
The conversion preserves the two's-complement bit pattern of the signed value that often corresponds to a large unsigned result.
The expression ``++2U < -1++`` evaluates to ``++true++``, for instance.

{cpp}20 introduced remedy to this common pitfall: a family of ``++std::cmp_*++`` functions defined in the ``++<utility>++`` header:

* ``++std::cmp_equal++``
* ``++std::cmp_not_equal++``
* ``++std::cmp_less++``
* ``++std::cmp_greater++``
* ``++std::cmp_less_equal++``
* ``++std::cmp_greater_equal++``

These functions correctly handle negative numbers and are safe against lossy integer conversion.
For example, the comparison of ``++2U++`` and ``++-1++`` using ``++std::cmp_less(2U, -1)++`` evaluates to ``++false++`` and matches common intuition.

=== Associated rule S6214

This rule (S6183) starts by detecting comparisons between signed and unsigned integers.
If the signed value can be proven negative, rule S6214 will raise an issue.
Otherwise, this rule will raise an issue.

> Therefore, if rule S6183 is enabled, S6214 should be enabled, too.

Reviewer: This looks like a minor point. It will be relevant only to people discovering the rules and people setting the quality profiles, and they should be used to look into the "Resources" section for related rules.
The most important audience - the dev trying to understand the issue wouldn't find this info useful.
I would put it in the "Resources" section when it references S6214.

Reviewer: Reading on, I see that the code examples look odd if you don't know how these two rules relate. However, it is not relevant before that.
How about moving this to Resources and adding a note in the "How to fix it" section saying that S6183 deliberately avoids intersection with S6214?

Author: I put a note in the "How to fix it" section and added another sentence to the description of related rules. This should reduce the noise for developers trying to understand the rule.

== What is the potential impact?

Comparisons between ``++signed++`` and ``++unsigned++`` integer types produce counterintuitive results.

> Failing to understand integer conversion rules can lead to tricky bugs and to exploitable vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: Did you check that we shouldn't replace the "exploitable" word for inclusive language?

Author: I've rephrased that a bit. I'm not aware of any inclusive language guide(s).

> The major integer conversion risks include narrowing types, converting from unsigned to signed and from negative to unsigned.

Reviewer: I would appreciate an example of an exploit. E.g., some attacker sends a negative user input used as a loop bound and suddenly we read past the intended memory and leak a secret, or copy past the intended size and deploy shell code.

Author: I've made an attempt. Please give it a read.

== How to fix it

> Use the appropriate function from the ``++std::cmp_*++`` family to conduct comparisons between signed _and_ unsigned integer types.

Reviewer: Why do you emphasize "_and_"?

Author: It's not really necessary, I guess.

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
#include <iostream>

void foo() {
  if (std::cmp_less(2U, -1)) { // Compliant: for this rule (S6183) and associated rule S6214
    std::cout << "2 is less than -1\n";
  } else {
    std::cout << "2 is not less than -1\n";
  }
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
bool foo(unsigned x, int y) {
  return x < y; // Noncompliant: y might be negative
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
bool foo(unsigned x, int y) {
  return std::cmp_less(x, y); // Compliant
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
bool fun(int x, std::vector<int> const& v) {
  return x < v.size(); // Noncompliant: x might be negative
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----
bool fun(int x, std::vector<int> const& v) {
  return std::cmp_less(x, v.size()); // Compliant
}

void compute(std::vector<int> const &v) {
  // Compliant: v.size() returns an unsigned integer, but only positive signed integer values are involved
  if (0 < v.size() && v.size() < 100) {
  }

> }

Reviewer: I would split this out into a separate code snippet because it will be surprising in the diff view.
Maybe put it into the "Why this is an issue" section? (I am not sure products can handle multiple snippets in the "Compliant solution" section.)

Author: I've removed the `compute` function entirely. It doesn't have a "noncompliant counterpart" if that makes sense.

    // passes through this call to `execl` which opens a new shell with this
    // program's (possibly elevated) permissions.
    execl("/bin/bash", "bash", (char *)NULL);
  } else {
    printf("Not so fast!\n");
  }
  return 0;
}
----

The program takes as arguments a string and its size, and uses these arguments to copy the string argument into an internal buffer.
Before copying the string into its internal buffer it checks whether the user-provided string fits into the buffer.
However, the respective check only validates if the provided string length is smaller or equal to the buffer's size.
Since the `atoi` function returns a signed integer, a user may provide a negative number to withstand that check.
The result of `sizeof(*)` on the other hand returns an unsigned integer which causes the expression `user_input * sizeof(char)` to be evaluated by (i) converting both operands to unsigned integers, (ii) performing the multiplication, and (iii) returning the result as an unsigned integer type.
A malicious user is hence able to provide a carefully crafted negative integer and string to bypass the size check while still providing a valid size argument for the call to `memcpy`.

> This, in turn, enables the malicious user to overflow the buffer variable `buf` to override the `user_input` variable which allows the second `if` statement to be evaluated to true, eventually opening a new shell with the target program's possibly elevated permissions.

Reviewer: This is a long paragraph, and that makes it difficult to read. Yet, it is important to understand the tricky code above.

Here is one possible way to break it down.
- 1 paragraph only "description of what it does" - the first two sentences.
- 1 paragraph "what can go wrong"
- 1 paragraph "how a malicious user can abuse this"

I.e. (although now that the three paragraphs stands on their own, they might need a bit of reformulation):

> The program takes as arguments a string and its size, and uses these arguments to copy the string argument into an internal buffer.
Before copying the string into its internal buffer it checks whether the user-provided string fits into the buffer.

> However, the respective check only validates if the provided string length is smaller or equal to the buffer's size.
Since the `atoi` function returns a signed integer, a user may provide a negative number to withstand that check.
The result of `sizeof(*)` on the other hand returns an unsigned integer which causes the expression `user_input * sizeof(char)` to be evaluated by
>  1. converting both operands to unsigned integers,
>  2. performing the multiplication, and
>  3. returning the result as an unsigned integer type.

> A malicious user is hence able to provide a carefully crafted negative integer and string to bypass the size check while still providing a valid size argument for the call to `memcpy`.
This, in turn, enables the malicious user to overflow the buffer variable `buf` to override the `user_input` variable which allows the second `if` statement to be evaluated to true, eventually opening a new shell with the target program's possibly elevated permissions.

Author: I think I could improve it to make the example easier to follow.

== How to fix it

Use the appropriate function from the ``++std::cmp_*++`` family to conduct comparisons between signed and unsigned integer types.

Note that this rule (S6183) deliberately avoids intersection with S6214.

=== Code examples

> ==== Noncompliant code example

Reviewer: This example might be confusing: it is noncompliant but marked as compliant for this rule only due to detail in how SQ rules work together.
I would move it later in the list of examples. And I think this would be a better place for

> Note that this rule (S6183) deliberately avoids intersection with S6214.

Instead of directly in the "How to fix it" section

Author: I've made an attempt and introduced a separate section to discuss this.

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#include <iostream>

void foo() {

>   if (2U < -1) { // Compliant: raises on associated rule S6214

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if (2U < -1) { // Compliant: the comparison is incorrect but S6214 raises an issue instead of S6183
```

void foo() {
  if (2U < -1) { // Compliant: raises on associated rule S6214
    std::cout << "2 is less than -1\n";
  } else {
    std::cout << "2 is not less than -1\n";
  }
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
#include <iostream>

void foo() {
  if (std::cmp_less(2U, -1)) { // Compliant: for this rule (S6183) and associated rule S6214
    std::cout << "2 is less than -1\n";
  } else {
    std::cout << "2 is not less than -1\n";
  }
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
bool foo(unsigned x, int y) {
  return x < y; // Noncompliant: y might be negative
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
bool foo(unsigned x, int y) {
  return std::cmp_less(x, y); // Compliant
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
bool fun(int x, std::vector<int> const& v) {
  return x < v.size(); // Noncompliant: x might be negative
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----
bool fun(int x, std::vector<int> const& v) {
  return std::cmp_less(x, v.size()); // Compliant
}
----

> == Resources

Reviewer: you can add https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/intcmp to the "Documentation" subsection

    execl("/bin/bash", "bash", (char *)NULL);
  } else {
    printf("Not so fast!\n");
  }
  return 0;
}
----

The program takes as arguments a string and its size, and uses these arguments to copy the string argument into an internal buffer.
Before copying the string into its internal buffer it checks whether the user-provided string fits into the buffer.
The program also comprises a call to `execl` that opens a shell with the program's possibly elevated permissions -- a potentially dangerous endeavour.
Even though the call to `execl` seems unreachable at a first glance, it can actually be reached due to signed/unsigned integer conversion.

The check for the buffer size only validates that the provided string length (`user_input`) is smaller or equal to the buffer's size.
Since the `atoi` function returns a signed integer, a user may provide a negative number to withstand that check.
The result of `sizeof(*)` on the other hand returns an unsigned integer which causes the expression `user_input * sizeof(char)` to be evaluated by

  . converting both operands to unsigned integers,
  . performing the multiplication, and
  . returning the result as an unsigned integer type.

> A malicious user is hence able to provide a carefully crafted negative integer and string to bypass the size check while still providing a valid size argument for the call to `memcpy`.

Reviewer: Article "a" vs. plural nouns
```suggestion
A malicious user is hence able to provide carefully crafted negative integer and string to bypass the size check while still providing a valid size argument for the call to `memcpy`.
```
or
```suggestion
A malicious user is hence able to provide a carefully crafted negative integer and a string to bypass the size check while still providing a valid size argument for the call to `memcpy`.
```

> A malicious user is hence able to provide a carefully crafted negative integer and string to bypass the size check while still providing a valid size argument for the call to `memcpy`.

Reviewer: Also, I am not sure what you mean by "a valid size argument for the call to `memcpy`".
I guess you mean the memcpy won't crash trying to copy gazillion of bytes. If so, how about this wording?
> ... while still arriving at the appropriate size argument to not crash `memcpy`.

Author: That reads well!

== How to fix it

Use the appropriate function from the ``++std::cmp_*++`` family to conduct comparisons between signed and unsigned integer types.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
bool foo(unsigned x, int y) {
  return x < y; // Noncompliant: y might be negative
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
bool foo(unsigned x, int y) {
  return std::cmp_less(x, y); // Compliant
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
bool fun(int x, std::vector<int> const& v) {
  return x < v.size(); // Noncompliant: x might be negative
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
bool fun(int x, std::vector<int> const& v) {
  return std::cmp_less(x, v.size()); // Compliant
}
----

== Interactions with associated rule S6214

Note that this rule (S6183) deliberately avoids intersection with S6214.

> While S6183 triggers when detecting comparisons between signed and unsigned integers, S6214 will raise an issue if the signed value can be proven to be negative -- in which case it is definitely a bug.

Reviewer: This does not say that S6183 does not trigger for cases that are provably a bug.

How about this reformulation:
```suggestion
While S6214 raises an issue if the signed value can be proven to be negative (in which case it is definitely a bug), S6281 will flag all *other* comparisons between signed and unsigned integers.
```

Author: That reads well, too. Sold!
